marine plastic pollution is an ever-increasing problem that demands immediate mitigation and reduction plans. here, a model based on satellite-tracked buoy observations and scaled to a large data set of observations on microplastic from surface trawls was used to simulate the transport of plastics floating on the ocean surface from 2015 to 2025, with the goal to assess the optimal marine microplastic removal locations for two scenarios: removing the most surface microplastic and reducing the impact on ecosystems, using plankton growth as a proxy. the simulations show that the optimal removal locations are primarily located off the coast of china and in the indonesian archipelago for both scenarios. our estimates show that 31% of the modelled microplastic mass can be removed by 2025 using 29 plastic collectors operating at a 45% capture efficiency from these locations, compared to only 17% when the 29 plastic collectors are moored in the north pacific garbage patch, between hawaii and california. the overlap of ocean surface microplastics and phytoplankton growth can be reduced by 46% at our proposed locations, while sinks in the north pacific can only reduce the overlap by 14%. these results are an indication that oceanic plastic removal might be more effective in removing a greater microplastic mass and in reducing potential harm to marine life when closer to shore than inside the plastic accumulation zones in the centres of the gyres.

the interoceanic transfer of seawater between the indian ocean and the atlantic, ‘agulhas leakage’, forms a chokepoint for the overturning circulation in the global ocean. by combining output from a series of high-resolution ocean and climate models with in situ and satellite observations, we construct a time series of agulhas leakage for the period 1870-2014. the time series demonstrates the impact of southern hemisphere westerlies on decadal timescales. agulhas leakage shows a tantalizing correlation with the atlantic multi-decadal oscillation on multi-decadal timescales; the former leading by 15 years. this is relevant for climate in the north atlantic.

microplastic debris floating at the ocean surface can harm marine life. understanding the severity of this harm requires knowledge of plastic abundance and distributions. dozens of expeditions measuring microplastics have been carried out since the 1970s, but they have primarily focused on the north atlantic and north pacific accumulation zones, with much sparser coverage elsewhere. here, we use the largest dataset of microplastic measurements assembled to date to assess the confidence we can have in global estimates of microplastic abundance and mass. we use a rigorous statistical framework to standardize a global dataset of plastic marine debris measured using surface-trawling plankton nets and coupled this with three different ocean circulation models to spatially interpolate the observations. our estimates show that the accumulated number of microplastic particles in 2014 ranges from 15 to 51 trillion particles, weighing between 93 and 236 thousand metric tons, which is only approximately 1% of global plastic waste estimated to enter the ocean in the year 2010. these estimates are larger than previous global estimates, but vary widely because the scarcity of data in most of the world ocean, differences in model formulations, and fundamental knowledge gaps in the sources, transformations and fates of microplastics in the ocean.

the southern ocean plays a critical role in global climate, yet the mixing properties of the circulation in this part of the ocean remain poorly understood. here, dispersion in the vicinity of the southern antarctic circumpolar current front, one of the branches of the antarctic circumpolar current, is studied using ten pairs of surface drifters deployed systematically across the frontal jet and its flanks. drifter pairs were deployed with an initial separation of 13m and report their position every hour. the separation of the pairs over seven months, in terms of their finite scale lyaponuv exponents (fsle), dispersion, and diffusivity, is characterized and related to expected behavior from quasi-geostrophic (qg) and surface quasi-geostrophic (sqg) theories. the fsle analysis reveals two submesoscale regimes, with sqg-like behavior at scales below 3.2km and mixed qg/sqg behavior at scales between 3.2km and 73km. the dispersion analysis, however, suggests qg-like behavior for the smallest scales. both dispersion and diffusivity appear isotropic for scales up to 500km. finally, there is no clear indication of a cross-jet variation of drifter dispersion.

exceptionally low north american temperatures and record-breaking precipitation over the british isles during winter 2013-14 were interconnected by anomalous ocean evaporation over the north atlantic subpolar gyre region (spg). this evaporation (or oceanic latent heat release) was accompanied by strong sensible heat loss to the atmosphere. the enhanced heat loss over the spg was caused by a combination of surface westerly winds from the north american continent and northerly winds from the nordic seas region that were colder, drier and stronger than normal. a distinctive feature of the air-sea exchange was that the enhanced heat loss spanned the entire width of the spg, with evaporation anomalies intensifying in the east while sensible heat flux anomalies were slightly stronger upstream in the west. the immediate impact of the strong air-sea fluxes on the ocean-atmosphere system included a reduction in ocean heat content of the spg and a shift in basin-scale pathways of ocean heat and atmospheric freshwater transport. atmospheric reanalysis data and the en4 ocean data set indicate that a longer-term legacy of the winter has been the enhanced formation of a particularly dense mode of subpolar mode water (spmw) - one of the precursors of north atlantic deep water and thus an important component of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation. using particle trajectory analysis, the likely dispersal of newly-formed spmw is evaluated, providing evidence for the re-emergence of anomalously cold spmw in early winter 2014/15.

plastic marine debris pollution is rapidly becoming one of the critical environmental concerns facing wildlife in the 21st century. here we present a risk analysis for plastic ingestion by sea turtles on a global scale. we combined global debris distributions based on ocean drifter data with sea turtle habitat maps to predict exposure levels to debris. empirical data from necropsies of deceased animals were then utilised to assess the consequence of exposure to plastics. we modelled the risk (probability of debris ingestion) by incorporating exposure and consequence, and included life history stage, species of turtle, and date of stranding observation as possible additional explanatory factors. life history stage is the best predictor of debris ingestion, but the best-fit model also incorporates encounter rates within a limited distance from stranding location, debris predictions specific to the date of the stranding study, and species. there was no difference in ingestion rates between stranded animals vs. those caught as bycatch from fishing activity, suggesting that stranded animals are not a biased representation of ingestion rates in the background population. oceanic lifestage turtles are at the highest risk of debris ingestion, and olive ridley turtles are the most at-risk species. the regions of highest risk to global turtle populations are off of the east coasts of the usa, australia, and south africa; the east indian ocean, and southeast asia. model results can be used to predict the number of turtles globally at risk of debris ingestion. based on currently available data, initial calculations indicate that up to 52% of turtles may have ingested debris. further study is required to ground truth this estimate.

human induced climate change is projected to increase ocean temperature and modify circulation patterns, with potential widespread implications for the transport and survival of planktonic larvae of marine organisms. circulation affects the dispersal of larvae, whereas temperature impacts larval development and survival. however, the combined effect of changes in circulation and temperature on larval dispersal and survival has not been studied in a future climate scenario. such understanding is crucial to predict future species distributions, anticipate ecosystem shifts, and design effective management strategies. we simulate contemporary (1990s) and future (2060s) dispersal of lobster larvae using an eddy-resolving ocean model in south-eastern australia, a region of rapid ocean warming. here we show that the effects of changes in circulation and temperature can counter each other: ocean warming favours the survival of lobster larvae, whereas a strengthened western boundary current diminishes the supply of larvae to the coast restricting cross-current larval dispersal. furthermore, we find that changes in circulation have a stronger effect on connectivity patterns of lobster larvae along south-eastern australia than ocean warming so that the supply of larvae to the coast diminishes by ~ 4% and the settlement peak shifts poleward by ~270km. thus ocean circulation rather than temperature may be the dominant factor in climate-induced expansion of species ranges.

although environmental selection and spatial separation have been shown to shape the distribution and abundance of marine microorganisms, the effects of advection (physical transport) have not been directly tested. here we examine 25 samples covering all major water masses of the southern ocean to determine the effects of advection on microbial biogeography. even when environmental factors and spatial separation are controlled for, there is a positive correlation between advection distance and taxonomic dissimilarity, indicating that an advection effect has a role in shaping marine microbial community composition. this effect is likely due to the advection of cells increasing the probability that upstream microorganisms will colonize downstream sites. our study shows that in addition to distance and environmental selection, advection shapes the composition of marine microbial communities.

the ekman dynamics of the ocean surface circulation is known to contain attracting regions such as the great oceanic gyres and the associated garbage patches. less well-known are the extents of the basins of attractions of these regions and how strongly attracting they are. understanding the shape and extent of the basins of attraction sheds light on the question of the strength of connectivity of different regions of the ocean, which helps in understanding the flow of buoyant material like plastic litter. using short flow time trajectory data from a global ocean model, we create a markov chain model of the surface ocean dynamics. the surface ocean is not a conservative dynamical system as water in the ocean follows three-dimensional pathways, with upwelling and downwelling in certain regions. using our markov chain model we easily compute net surface upwelling and downwelling, and verify that it matches observed patterns of upwelling and downwelling in the real ocean. we analyze the markov chain to determine multiple attracting regions and their absorption probabilities. finally, using an eigenvector approach, we (i) identify the five major ocean garbage patches, (ii) partition the ocean into basins of attraction for each of the garbage patches, and (iii) partition the ocean into regions which are approximately forward-invariant (almost-invariant sets).

the pathways of recently ventilated north atlantic deep water (nadw) are part of the lower limb of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation (amoc). in the south atlantic these pathways have been the subject of discussion for years, mostly due to the lack of observations. knowledge of the pathways of the amoc in the south atlantic is a first order prerequisite for understanding the fluxes of climatically important properties. in this paper, historical and new observations, including hydrographic and oxygen sections, argo data, and chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs), are examined together with two different analyses of the ocean general circulation model for the earth simulator (ofes) to trace the pathway of the recently ventilated nadw through the south atlantic. clivar-era cfcs, oxygen and salinity clearly show that the strongest nadw pathway in the south atlantic is along the western boundary (similar to the north atlantic). in addition to the western boundary pathway, tracers show an eastward spreading of nadw between ~17-25°s. analyzed together with the results of earlier studies, the observations and model output presented here indicate that after crossing the equator, the deep western boundary current (dwbc) transports water with the characteristics of nadw and a total volume transport of approximately 14 sv (1 sv = 106 m3 s-1). it crosses 5°s as a narrow western boundary current and becomes dominated by eddies further south. when this very energetic eddying flow reaches the vitória-trindade ridge (~20°s), the flow follows two different pathways. the main portion of the nadw flow continues along the continental shelf of south america in the form of a strong reformed dwbc, while a smaller portion, about 22% of the initial transport, flows towards the interior of the basin.

primary productivity is limited by the availability of iron over large areas of the global ocean. changes in the supply of iron to these regions could have major impacts on primary productivity and the carbon cycle. however, source regions and supply mechanisms of iron to the global oceans remain poorly constrained. shelf sediments are considered one of the largest sources of dissolved iron to the global ocean, and a large shelf sediment iron flux is prescribed in many biogeochemical models over all areas of bathymetry shallower than 1000 m. here, we infer the likely location of shelf sediment iron sources in the southern ocean, by identifying where satellite chlorophyll concentrations are enhanced over shallow bathymetry (< 1000 m). we further compare chlorophyll concentrations with the position of ocean fronts, to assess the relative role of horizontal advection and upwelling for supplying iron to the ocean surface. we show that mean annual chlorophyll concentrations are not visibly enhanced over areas of shallow bathymetry that are located more than 500 km from a coastline. mean annual chlorophyll concentrations > 2 mg m-3 are only found within 50 km of a continental or island coastline. these results suggest that sedimentary iron sources only exist on continental and island shelves. large sedimentary iron fluxes do not seem present on seamounts and submerged plateaus. large chlorophyll blooms develop where the western boundary currents detach from the continental shelves, and turn eastward into the sub-antarctic zone. chlorophyll concentrations are enhanced along contours of sea surface height extending off the continental shelves, as shown by the trajectories of virtual water parcels in satellite altimetry data. these analyses support the hypothesis that bioavailable iron from continental shelves is entrained into western boundary currents, and advected into the sub-antarctic zone along the dynamical subtropical front. our results indicate that upwelling at fronts in the open ocean is unlikely to deliver iron to the ocean surface from deep sources. finally, we hypothesize how a reduction in sea level may have altered the distribution of shelf sediment iron sources in the southern ocean and increased export production over the sub-antarctic zone during glacial intervals.

broadcast-spawning marine organisms with long pelagic larval duration are often expected to be genetically homogeneous throughout their ranges. when genetic structure is found in such taxa, it may be in the form of chaotic genetic patchiness: patterns that might seem independent of any underlying environmental variation. seascape genetics, i.e. the joint analysis of population genetic data and marine environmental data, can elucidate factors driving such spatial genetic diversity patterns. using meso-scale sampling, microsatellite data and advection connectivity simulations, we studied the effect of temperate southern australian ocean circulation on the genetic structure of the snail nerita atramentosa. this species has a long pelagic larval duration and is represented as a single metapopulation throughout its ~3000 km range, but even so, we identified range-wide stepping-stone dispersal. connectivity simulations indicate that this is a result of larval retention on the continental shelf, where currents are erratic and often shoreward. in contrast, long-distance dispersal facilitated by the region’s shelf-edge boundary currents is rare because few larvae ever reach them. our study contributes to the growing evidence that departures from the expectations of panmixia along continuous and environmentally homogeneous coastlines are not limited to low-dispersal species, and it identifies on-shelf larval retention as an important driver of stepping-stone dispersal.

the water mass pathways to the north atlantic oxygen minimum zone (naomz) are traditionally sketched within the cyclonic tropical circulation via the poleward branching from the eastward flowing jets that lie south of 10on. however, our water mass analysis of historic hydrographic observations together with numerical lagrangian experiments consistently reveal that the potential density level of σθ = 26.8 kg m-3 (σ26.8, approximately 300 m depth) separates two distinct regimes of circulation within the central water (cw) stratum of the naomz. in the upper cw (above σ26.8), and in agreement with previous studies, the supply of water mainly comes from the south with a predominant contribution of south atlantic cw. in the lower cw (below σ26.8), where minimal oxygen content is found, the tropical pathway is instead drastically weakened in favour of a subtropical pathway. more than two thirds of the total water supply to this lower layer takes place north of 10on, mainly via an eastward flow at 14n and northern recirculations from the northern subtropical gyre. the existence of these northern jets explains the greater contribution of north atlantic cw observed in the lower cw, making up to 50% of the water mass at the naomz core. the equatorward transfer of mass from the well-ventilated northern subtropical gyre emerges as an essential part of the ventilation of the naomz.

the pacific equatorial undercurrent (euc) transports water, originating from a number of distinct sources, eastward across the pacific ocean. it is responsible for supplying nutrients to the productive eastern equatorial pacific ocean. of particular importance is the transport of iron by the euc; the limiting nutrient in that region. although the mean circulation and sources of euc water are reasonably well understood, it is unclear how these sources vary on seasonal to interannual timescales. here, a lagrangian analysis is applied to the eddy-resolving ofam3 ocean simulation, in order to identity variability in the source distributions of the euc over an 18 year period (1993-2010). while the total volume transport of the euc changes on interannual (up to 30 sv) and seasonal (up to 15 sv) time scales, the relative contributions of the source waters and median pathways remain remarkably unchanged and there are no coherent signals with enso variability across the euc from 1650e to 1400w. it is hypothesized that this is due to the large spread in travel times among the pathways from the different sources. the consequent erosion of transport anomalies generated at the different western boundary source regions associated with enso may help explain why previous studies have, for example, found little relationship between variability in iron fluxes off papua new guinea shelves and the chlorophyll response in the eastern tropical pacific.

fossils of marine microorganisms such as planktic foraminifera are among the cornerstones of palaeoclimatological studies. it is often assumed that the proxies derived from their shells represent ocean conditions above the location where they were deposited. planktic foraminifera, however, are carried by ocean currents and, depending on the life traits of the species, potentially incorporate distant ocean conditions. here we use high-resolution ocean models to assess the footprint of planktic foraminifera and validate our method with proxy analyses from two locations. results show that foraminifera, and thus recorded palaeoclimatic conditions, may originate from areas up to several thousands of kilometres away, reflecting an ocean state significantly different from the core site. in the eastern equatorial regions and the western boundary current extensions, the offset may reach 1.5C for species living for a month and 3.0C for longer-living species. oceanic transport hence appears to be a crucial aspect in the interpretation of proxy signals.

a piece of plastic discarded into the sea travels far and wide, carried by complex currents. eventually, the material settles into one of five distinct garbage patches in the subtropical oceans.

almost all organisms in the ocean are impacted by ocean currents. hence, there is growing interest by marine ecologists in using objective methods to assess current drift and its implications for marine connectivity. here, an online tool - hosted at adrift.org.au - is introduced that allows for a simple, quantitative assessment of drift patterns and transit time scales on the global scale. the tool is based on a statistical transition matrix representation of the observed trajectories of more than 15 thousand surface drifters. users can select any point in the ocean and obtain the evolution of the probability density distribution for a tracer released at that point, both forward and backward in time, for a maximum interval of 10 years. it is envisioned that this tool will be used in research and teaching, especially where estimates of drift patterns and transit times are required quickly.

a key question in ecology and evolution is the relative role of natural selection and neutral evolution in producing biogeographic patterns. here we quantify the role of neutral processes by simulating division, mutation and death of 100k individual marine bacteria cells with full 1 mbp genomes in a global surface ocean circulation model. the model is run for up to 100k years and output is analyzed using blast alignment and metagenomics fragment recruitment. simulations show the production and maintenance of biogeographic patterns, characterized by distinct provinces subject to mixing and periodic takeovers by neighbors (coalescence), after which neutral evolution re-establishes the province and the patterns reorganize. the emergent patterns are substantial (e.g., down to 99.5% dna identity between north and central pacific provinces) and suggest that microbes evolve faster than ocean currents can disperse them. this approach can also be used to explore environmental selection.

the ekman dynamics of the ocean surface circulation is known to contain attracting regions such as the great oceanic gyres and the associated garbage patches. less well-known are the extents of the basins of attractions of these regions and how strongly attracting they are. understanding the shape and extent of the basins of attraction sheds light on the question of the strength of connectivity of different regions of the ocean, which helps in understanding the flow of buoyant material like plastic litter. using short flow time trajectory data from a global ocean model, we create a markov chain model of the surface ocean dynamics. the surface ocean is not a conservative dynamical system as water in the ocean follows three-dimensional pathways, with upwelling and downwelling in certain regions. using our markov chain model we easily compute net surface upwelling and downwelling, and verify that it matches observed patterns of upwelling and downwelling in the real ocean. we analyze the markov chain to determine multiple attracting regions and their absorption probabilities. finally, using an eigenvector approach, we (i) identify the five major ocean garbage patches, (ii) partition the ocean into basins of attraction for each of the garbage patches, and (iii) partition the ocean into regions which are approximately forward-invariant (almost-invariant sets).

an observed warming of the tasman sea in recent decades has been linked to a poleward shift of the maximum wind stress curl, and a strengthening of the poleward flow along the coast of southeastern australia. however, changes in the east australian current (eac) separation latitude, as well as in the contribution of the eac, the eac extension and its eddy field to the total southward transport due to such a strengthening remain unknown. this study uses 30 years (1980-2010) of the ocean forecast for the earth simulator (ofes) sea surface height and velocity outputs to obtain a 3 decade long time series of i) the eac separation latitude, ii) the southward transport along the coast of southeastern australia , and iii) the southward transport across the eac separation latitude. a lagrangian approach is implemented and the spin parameter is used to provide a quantitative distinction between the transports occurring outside and inside (cyclonic and anticyclonic) eddies. significant positive trends of the low pass southward transports indicate that the intensification of the poleward flow has occurred both within the eac and in the eac extension. in addition, a significant increase in southward transport inside and outside eddies is found. importantly, the contribution of eddy driven transport has a large temporal variability and shows a sharp increase from 2005 onwards. finally our results show that the eac has not penetrated further south but it has separated more frequently at the southernmost latitudes within the region where it typically turns eastward.

climate-driven changes in biotic interactions can profoundly alter ecological communities, particularly when they impact foundation species. in marine systems, changes in herbivory and the consequent loss of dominant habitat forming species can result in dramatic community phase shifts, such as from coral to macroalgal dominance when tropical fish herbivory decreases, and from algal forests to 'barrens' when temperate urchin grazing increases. here, we propose a novel phase-shift away from macroalgal dominance caused by tropical herbivores extending their range into temperate regions. we argue that this phase shift is facilitated by poleward-flowing boundary currents that are creating ocean warming hotspots around the globe, enabling the range expansion of tropical species and increasing their grazing rates in temperate areas. overgrazing of temperate macroalgae by tropical herbivorous fishes has already occurred in japan and the mediterranean. emerging evidence suggests similar phenomena are occurring in other temperate regions, with increasing occurrence of tropical fish on temperate reefs.

the summertime phytoplankton bloom near the kerguelen plateau is in marked contrast to the low-chlorophyll conditions typical of the southern ocean and is thought to arise from natural iron fertilisation. the mechanisms of iron supply to the euphotic zone in this region are poorly understood, and numerical studies of iron transport have until now omitted fine-scale (sub-mesoscale) dynamics which have been shown to significantly increase vertical transport in other parts of the ocean. we present the first sub-mesoscale-resolving study of the flow and vertical transport in this region. the modelled transport and flow structure agree well with observations. we find that an increase in horizontal resolution from mesoscale-resolving (1/20&deg;) to 1/80&deg; resolves sub-mesoscale filamentary frontal structures in which vertical velocities are dramatically higher and are consistent with available observations. lagrangian tracking shows that water is advected to the surface from much greater depth in the sub-mesoscale-resolving experiment, and that vertical exchange is far more rapid and frequent. this study of sub-mesoscale vertical velocities sets the foundation for subsequent investigation of iron transport in this environment.

the upper ocean circulation of the pacific and indian oceans are connected through both the indonesian throughflow north of australia and the tasman leakage around its south. the relative importance of these two pathways is examined using virtual lagrangian particles in a high-resolution nested ocean model. the unprecedented combination of a long integration time within an eddy-permitting ocean model simulation allows the first assessment of the interannual variability of these pathways in a realistic setting. the mean indonesian throughflow, as diagnosed by the particles, is 14.3 sv, considerably higher than the diagnosed average tasman leakage of 4.2 sv. the time series of indonesian throughflow agrees well with the eulerian transport through the major indonesian passages, validating the lagrangian approach using transport-tagged particles. while the indonesian throughflow is mainly associated with upper-ocean pathways, the tasman leakage is concentrated in the 400 - 900 m depth range at sub-tropical latitudes. over the effective period considered (1968-1994), no apparent relationship is found between the tasman leakage and indonesian throughflow. however, the indonesian throughflow transport correlates with enso. during strong la niñas more water of southern hemisphere origin flows through makassar, moluccas, ombai and timor straits, but less through moluccas strait. in general, each strait responds differently to enso, highlighting the complex nature of the enso-itf interaction. 

lagrangian particle tracking within ocean models is an important tool for the examination of ocean circulation, ventilation timescales and connectivity and is increasingly being used to understand ocean biogeochemistry. lagrangian trajectories are obtained by advecting particles within velocity fields derived from hydrodynamic ocean models. for studies of ocean flows on scales ranging from mesoscale up to basin scales, the temporal resolution of the velocity fields should ideally not be more than a few days to capture the high frequency variability that is inherent in mesoscale features. however, in reality, the model output is often archived at much lower temporal resolutions. here, we quantify the differences in the lagrangian particle trajectories embedded in velocity fields of varying temporal resolution. particles are advected from 3-day to 30-day averaged fields in a high-resolution global ocean circulation model. we also investigate whether adding lateral diffusion to the particle movement can compensate for the reduced temporal resolution.
trajectory errors reveal the expected degradation of accuracy in the trajectory positions when decreasing the temporal resolution of the velocity field. divergence timescales associated with averaging velocity fields up to 30 days are faster than the intrinsic dispersion of the velocity fields but slower than the dispersion caused by the interannual variability of the velocity fields. in experiments focusing on the connectivity along major currents, including western boundary currents, the volume transport carried between two strategically placed sections tends to increase with increased temporal averaging. simultaneously, the average travel times tend to decrease. based on these two bulk measured diagnostics, lagrangian experiments that use temporal averaging of up to nine days show no significant degradation in the flow characteristics for a set of six currents investigated in more detail. the addition of random-walk-style diffusion does not mitigate the errors introduced by temporal averaging for large-scale open ocean lagrangian simulations.

the indian-atlantic water exchange south of africa (agulhas leakage) is a key component of the global ocean circulation. no quantitative estimation of the palaeo-agulhas leakage exists. we quantify the variability in inter-ocean exchange over the past 640,000 years, using planktic foraminiferal assemblage data from two marine sediment records to define an agulhas leakage efficiency (ale) index. we confirm the validity of our new approach with a numerical ocean model that realistically simulates the modern agulhas leakage changes. our results suggest that, during the past several glacial-interglacial cycles, the agulhas leakage varied by ~10 sv and more during major climatic transitions. this lends strong credence to the hypothesis that modifications in the leakage played a key role in changing the overturning circulation to full-strength mode. our results are instrumental for validating and quantifying the contribution of the indian-atlantic water leakage to global climate changes.

european exploration of new zealand and the wider south pacific is traditionally considered to have commenced with the documented voyages of dutch explorer abel tasman in a.d. 1642 and british captain james cook in a.d. 1769, with no direct evidence of activity during the intervening years. here, we report on the discovery of a shipwreck on the west coast of northland in northern new zealand that likely occurred during that interval. the vessel was constructed from at least two tropical hardwoods and comprises planks and rib sections, measuring c. 25-27 m long with a beam of c. 6.5-7.5 m. radiocarbon (14c) dating of contiguous decadal blocks allows us to wiggle match these dates against the northern hemisphere 14c calibration curve to obtain a precise calendar age for the wood. taking into account the missing sapwood and probable period for timber seasoning we obtain a likely construction date for the ship of around a.d. 1705 ± 9 years. the dominance of dutch maritime trade during this time period, their known vessel construction in the tropics and the presence of copper on the hull of the wreck, all point to the likelihood of the vessel being of dutch construction. intriguingly, journal entries by cook and expedition members suggest at least one other european ship visited new zealand after tasman but prior to his arrival. the general limited lifespan of ships at the time makes this discovery the oldest known wreck from the region. importantly, the age of the northland vessel probably predates the first reported european landing by captain cook, as well as suggesting other vessels may have attempted to follow-up on the discovery recorded by tasman.

ocean temperatures have warmed in most regions over the last century and are expected to warm at a faster rate in the future. consistent with the view that marine species are thermally constrained, there is growing evidence that many species have already undergone poleward range shifts inline with warming trends. this study uses historical observations of ocean temperature and climate model projections to examine the implied migration of isotherms that mark the boundaries for species thermal habitats. in particular, we compare the rates of isotherm migration between different ocean regions and at different time scales and examine to what extent the implied migration is uniform or sporadic. widespread long-term warming implies poleward migration of isotherms in almost all regions. however, as the speed of isotherm migration is inversely related to local meridional sst gradients and the pattern of ocean warming is heterogeneous, migration speeds vary considerably between regions, season and over time. on decadal timescales, changes due to low frequency natural sst variability dominate over human induced changes. as such, there are multi-decadal periods in certain regions when we would expect to see range shifts that are much faster or in the opposite direction to that implied by anthropogenic warming. based on climate model projections, median isotherm migration speeds will be about seven times faster in the 21st century compared to the 20th century under a business as usual emissions scenario. moreover, sst warming is projected to be greater in summer than in winter in most regions, contrary to what happens over land. as such net isotherm migration speeds, particularly in the northern hemisphere summer, are projected to be much faster than winter migrations. finally we show that isotherms may exhibit erratic migration rates over time, even under uniform warming. isotherms tend to remain co-located with a thermal front for extended periods of time and then rapidly shift to a new position, marked by a more poleward thermal front. this implies that species ranges would also be expected to undergo sudden rapid shifts rather than exhibiting a gradual monotonic poleward march.

this study uses a global ocean eddy-permitting climate model to explore the export of abyssal water from the southern ocean, and its sensitivity to projected 21st century poleward intensifying southern ocean wind stress. we investigate the abyssal flow pathways and transport using a combination of lagrangian and eulerian techniques. in a eulerian format, the equatorward and poleward flows within similar abyssal density classes are increased by the wind stress changes, making it difficult to explicitly diagnose changes in the abyssal export in a meridional overturning circulation framework. lagrangian particle analyses are used to identify the major export pathways of southern ocean abyssal waters, and reveal an increase in the number of particles exported to the subtropics from source regions around antarctica in response to the wind forcing. both the lagrangian particle and eulerian analyses identify transients as playing a key role in the abyssal export of water from the southern ocean. wind driven modifications to the potential energy component of the vorticity balance in the abyss are also found to impact the southern ocean barotropic circulation.

the strongly eddying version of the parallel ocean program (pop) is used in two 45-year simulations to investigate the response of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation (amoc) to strongly enhanced freshwater input due to greenland melting, with an integrated flux of 0.5 sverdrup. for comparison, a similar set of experiments is performed using a non-eddying version of pop. the aim is to identify the signature of the salt advection feedback in the two configurations. for this reason, surface salinity is not restored in these experiments. the freshwater input leads to a quantitatively comparable reduction of the overturning strength in the two models. to examine the importance of transient effects in the relation between amoc strength and density distribution, the results of the eddy-resolving model are related to water mass transformation theory. the freshwater forcing leads to a reduction of the rate of light to dense water conversion in the north atlantic, but there is no change in dense to light transformation elsewhere, implying that high density layers are continuously deflating. main focus of the paper is on the effect of the amoc reduction on the basin-wide advection of freshwater. the low-resolution model results show a change of the net freshwater advection that is consistent with the salt advection feedback. however, for the eddy-resolving model, the net freshwater advection into the atlantic basin appears to be unaffected, despite the significant change in the large-scale velocity structure.


a maximum in the strength of agulhas leakage has been registered at the interface between indian and south atlantic oceans during glacial termination ii (t ii), presumably transporting the salt and heat necessary to maintain the atlantic meridional overturning circulation (amoc) at rates similar to the present day. however, it was never shown whether these waters that enter the cape basin from the indian ocean were effectively incorporated in the south atlantic gyre, or whether they retroflected into the indian and/or southern oceans. to solve this question, we investigate the presence of paleo agulhas rings from a sediment core on the central walvis ridge, almost 1,800 km farther into the atlantic basin than previous studied. analysis of a 20-year dataset from a global ocean circulation model allows us to relate density perturbations at the depth of the thermocline to the passage of individual rings over the core site. using this relation from the numerical model as the basis for a proxy, we generate a time series of d18o variability of globorotalia truncatulinoides single specimens, revealing high levels of thermocline depth variability at the site, suggesting enhanced numbers of agulhas rings moving into the south atlantic gyre around and before t ii. our record closely follows the published quantifications of agulhas leakage from the east of the cape basin, and thus shows that indian ocean waters entered the south atlantic circulation. this provides crucial support to the view of a prominent role of the agulhas leakage in the shift from a glacial to an interglacial mode of amoc.


although environmental selection and spatial separation have been shown to shape the distribution and abundance of marine microorganisms, the effects of advection (physical transport) have not been directly tested. here we examine 25 samples covering all major water masses of the southern ocean to determine the effects of advection on microbial biogeography. even when environmental factors and spatial separation are controlled for, there is a positive correlation between advection distance and taxonomic dissimilarity, indicating that an advection effect has a role in shaping marine microbial community composition. this effect is likely due to the advection of cells increasing the probability that upstream microorganisms will colonize downstream sites. our study shows that in addition to distance and environmental selection, advection shapes the composition of marine microbial communities.


in this paper we address the impact of agulhas leakage variability on the strength of the atlantic overturning circulation in the community climate system model, version 4 (ccsm4). in this model there is no identifiable impact of agulhas leakage on the strength of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation. however, an advective connection exists that transports salinity anomalies from the agulhas region into the north atlantic on decadal (30-40 yr) time scales. we show that salinity variability in the southeastern south atlantic is much weaker in the ccsm4 than in observations. this is plausibly a consequence of a bias in the mean salinity distribution, in particular the absence of the observed salinity front in the agulhas retroflection region. it is suggested that these basins are too homogeneous due to the bias in volume exchange between the south indian and atlantic oceans.


following the march 2011 fukushima disaster, large amounts of water contaminated with radionuclides, including cesium-137, were released into the pacific ocean. with a half-life of 30.1 years, cs-137 has the potential to travel large distances within the ocean. using an ensemble of regional eddy-resolving simulations, this study investigates the long-term ventilation pathways of the leaked cs-137 in the north pacific ocean. the simulations suggest that the contaminated plume would have been rapidly diluted below 10,000 bq/m3 by the energetic kuroshio current and kurushio extension by july 2011. based on our source function, which sits at the upper range of the published estimates, waters with cs-137 concentrations > 10 bq/m3 are projected to reach the northwestern american coast and the hawaiian archipelago by early 2014. driven by quasi-zonal oceanic jets, shelf waters north of 45°n experience cs-137 levels of 10-30 bq/m3 between 2014-2020, while the californian coast is projected to see lower concentrations (10-20 bq/m3) slightly later (2016-2025). this late but prolonged exposure is related to subsurface pathways of mode waters, where cs-137 is subducted toward the subtropics before being upwelled from deeper sources along the southern californian coast. the model suggests that fukushima-derived cs-137 will penetrate the interior ocean and spread to other oceanic basins over the next two decades and beyond. the sensitivity of our results to uncertainties in the source function and to inter-annual to multi-decadal variability is discussed.

antarctic bottom water (aabw) is formed in a few locations around the antarctic continent, each source with distinct temperature and salinity. after formation, the different aabw varieties cross the southern ocean and flow into the subtropical abyssal basins. it is shown here, using the analysis of lagrangian trajectories within the southern ocean state estimate (sose) model, that the pathways of the different sources of aabw have to a large extent amalgamated into one pathway by the time it reaches 31s in the deep subtropical basins. the antarctic circumpolar current appears to play an important role in the amalgamation, as 70% of the aabw completes at least one circumpolar loop before reaching the subtropical basins. this amalgamation of aabw pathways suggests that on decadal to centennial time scales, changes to properties and formation rates in any of the aabw source regions will be conveyed to all three subtropical abyssal basins.

pelagic organisms' movement and motion of buoyant particles are driven by processes operating across multiple, spatial and temporal scales. we developed a probabilistic, multi-scale model, the connectivity modeling system (cms), to gain a mechanistic understanding of dispersion and migration processes in the ocean. the model couples offline a new nested-grid technique to a stochastic lagrangian framework where individual variability is introduced by drawing particles' attributes at random from specified probability distributions of traits. this allows 1) to track seamlessly a large number of both actively swimming and inertial particles over multiple, independent ocean model domains and 2) to generate ensemble forecasts or hindcasts of the particles' three dimensional trajectories, dispersal kernels, and transition probability matrices used for connectivity estimates. in addition, cms provides lagrangian descriptions of oceanic phenomena (advection, dispersion, retention) and can be used in a broad range of oceanographic applications, from the fate of pollutants to the pathways of water masses in the global ocean. here we describe the cms modular system where particle behavior can be augmented with specific features, and a parallel module implementation simplifies data management and cpu intensive computations associated with solving for the tracking of millions of active particles. some novel features include on-the-fly data access of operational hydrodynamic models, individual particle variability and inertial motion, and multi-nesting capabilities to optimize resolution. we demonstrate the performance of the interpolation algorithm by testing accuracy in tracing the flow stream lines in both time and space and the efficacy of probabilistic modeling in evaluating the bio-physical coupling against empirical data. finally, following recommended practices for the development of community models, we provide an open source code with a series of coupled standalone, optional modules detailed in a user's guide.

much of the debris in the near-surface ocean collects in so-called garbage patches where, due to convergence of the surface flow, the debris is trapped for decades to millennia. until now, studies modelling the pathways of surface marine debris have not included release from the coasts nor factored in the possibility that release concentrations vary with region or that pathways may include a seasonal cycle. here, we use observational data from the global drifter program in a particle-trajectory tracer approach that includes the seasonal cycle to study the fate of marine debris in the open ocean from coastal regions around the world on interannual to centennial time scales. we find that six major garbage patches emerge, one in each of the five subtropical basins and one previously unreported patch in the barents sea. the evolution of each of the six patches is markedly different. with the exception of the north pacific, all patches are much more dispersive than expected from linear ocean circulation theory, suggesting that on centennial time scales the different basins are much better connected than previously thought and that inter-ocean exchanges play a large role in the spreading of marine debris. this study suggests that, over multi-millennial time scales, a significant amount of the debris released outside of the north atlantic will eventually end up in the north pacific patch, the main attractor of global marine debris.

as part of the global thermohaline circulation, some north atlantic deep water (nadw) exits the atlantic basin to the south of africa. observations have shown that there is a quasi-zonal pathway centred at 25s carrying nadw eastward, connecting the deep western boundary current to the cape basin. however, it has been unclear what sets this pathway. in particular, waters must move southward through the cape basin, thereby crossing isolines of planetary vorticity, in order to exit the basin. here, we find that an eddy thickness flux induced by agulhas rings moving northwestward, forces a circulation of nadw through the cape basin. the pathway at 25s feeds the southeastward flow of this circulation while conserving potential vorticity. using lagrangian floats advected for 300 years in a 1/10 resolution ocean model, we show that the most common pathway for nadw in our model lies directly below the agulhas ring corridor. by analysing the velocity and density fields in the model, we find that the decay of these rings, and their forward tilt with depth, results in a southward velocity, across isolines of planetary vorticity, of 1 to 2 cm/s in the deep waters. the associated stream function pattern yields a deep circulation transporting 4 sv of nadw from the deep western boundary current at 25s to the southern tip of africa.

tasman leakage, the westward flow of thermocline waters south of australia from the pacific to the indian ocean, is one of the lesser-studied of the inter-ocean exchanges. here, some of the properties of the tasman leakage are inferred from lagrangian particles integrated using the three-dimensional velocity fields of the 1/10 degree resolution ofes model. the mean tasman leakage in this model is 4.2 sv, with a standard deviation of 4.3 sv. the heat flux associated with this leakage lies in the range 0.08 - 0.18 pw. there is large variability in the tasman leakage on both sub-weekly and inter-annual scales, but no trend over the 1983-1997 period. despite the large weekly variability, with peaks of more than 20 sv, it appears that less than half of the tasman leakage is carried within eddies.

five years of data from a line of dynamic height moorings (dhm), bottom-pressure recorders (bpr), and pressure-equipped inverted echo sounders (pies) near the atlantic ocean western boundary at 26.5°n are used to evaluate the structure and variability of the deep western boundary current (dwbc) during 2004-2009. comparisons made between transports estimated from the dhm+bpr and those made by the pies demonstrate that the two systems are collecting equivalent volume transport information (correlation coefficient r = 0.96, root-mean-square difference = 6 sv; 1 sv = 106 m3 s-1). integrated to ~450 km off from the continental shelf and between 800 and 4800 dbar, the dwbc has a mean transport of approximately 32 sv and a standard deviation during these five years of 16 sv. both the barotropic (full-depth vertical mean) and baroclinic flows have significant variability (changes exceeding 10 sv) on time scales ranging from a few days to months, with the barotropic variations being larger and more energetic at all time scales. the annual cycle of the deep transport is highly dependent on the horizontal integration distance; integrating ~100 km offshore yields an annual cycle of roughly similar magnitude but shifted in phase relative to that found from current meter arrays in the 1980s-1990s, while the annual cycle becomes quite weak when integrating ~450 km offshore. variations in the dwbc transport far exceed those of the total basin-wide meridional overturning circulation (standard deviations of 16 sv vs. 5 sv). transport integrated in the deep layer out to the west side of the mid-atlantic ridge still demonstrates a surprisingly high variance, indicating that some compensation of the western basin deep variability must occur in the eastern basin. 

more than two decades of hydrography on the abaco line east of the bahamas at 26°n reveals decadal variability in the salinity of classical labrador sea water (clsw), despite the long distance from its source region in the north atlantic ocean. hydrographic time series from the labrador sea and from the abaco line show a pronounced step-like decrease in salinity; between 1985 and 1995 in the labrador sea and between 1995 and 2010 at the abaco line, suggesting a time lag between the two locations of approximately 9 years. the amplitude of the anomaly at the abaco line is 50% of the amplitude in the labrador sea. a similar time lag and reduction of amplitude is found in the high-resolution ofes model, in which salinity anomalies can be observed propagating through the deep western boundary current as well as through a broad interior pathway. on its way south to the abaco line, the clsw becomes 8 standard deviations saltier due to isopycnal mixing with mediterranean outflow water (mow). climatological data in the north atlantic suggests that the mixing ratio of mow to clsw at the abaco line is 1:4 and that no variability in mow is required to explain the observed variability at the abaco line. the data studied here suggest that decadal clsw anomalies stay relatively coherent while getting advected, despite the important role of interior pathways. 

the new community climate system model, version 4 (ccsm4) provides a powerful tool to understand and predict the earth’s climate system. we explore several aspects of the southern ocean in the ccsm4 including the surface climatology and interannual variability, simulation of key climate water masses (antarctic bottom water, subantarctic mode water and antarctic intermediate water), the transport and structure of the antarctic circumpolar current, and interbasin exchange via the agulhas and tasman leakages and at the brazil–malvinas confluence. we find that the ccsm4 has varying degrees of accuracy in the simulation of the climate of the southern ocean when compared to observations. this study has identified aspects of the model that warrant further analysis that will result in a more comprehensive understanding of ocean-atmosphere-ice dynamics and interactions that control the earth's climate and its variability. 

as the upper layer of the world ocean warms gradually during the 20th century, the inter-ocean heat transport from the indian to atlantic basin should be enhanced, and the atlantic ocean should therefore gain extra heat due to the increased upper ocean temperature of the inflow via the agulhas leakage. consistent with this hypothesis, instrumental records indicate that the atlantic ocean has warmed substantially more than any other ocean basin since the mid-20th century. a surface-forced global ocean-ice coupled model is used to test this hypothesis and to find that the observed warming trend of the atlantic ocean since the 1950s is largely due to an increase in the inter-ocean heat transport from the indian ocean. further analysis reveals that the increased inter-ocean heat transport is not only caused by the increased upper ocean temperature of the inflow but also, and more strongly, by the increased agulhas current leakage, which is augmented by the strengthening of the wind stress curl over the south atlantic and indian subtropical gyre. 

the advective transit time of temperature-salinity anomalies from the agulhas region to the regions of deep convection in the north atlantic ocean is an important time scale in climate, as it has been linked to variability in the atlantic meridional overturning circulation. studying this transit time scale is difficult because most observational and high-resolution model data is too short for assessment of the global circulation on decadal to centennial time scales. here, results are presented from a technique to obtain thousands of “super-trajectories” of any required length using a monte carlo simulation. these super-trajectories allow analysis of the circulation patterns and time scales based on lagrangian data, in this case observational surface drifter trajectories from the global drifter program and lagrangian data from the high-resolution ofes model. the observational super-trajectories can only be used to study the two-dimensional surface flow, while the numerical super-trajectories can be used to study the full three-dimensional circulation. results for the surface circulation indicate that the super-trajectories starting in the agulhas current and ending in the north atlantic take at least 4 years and most complete the journey in 30 to 40 years. this time scale is, largely due to convergence and subduction in the subtropical gyres, longer than the 10 to 25 years it takes the 3d numerical super-trajectories to complete the journey. 

time-mean zonal velocities, estimated from argo float trajectories and density profiles, are systematically examined for quasi-zonal jets, or striations, with the use of a simple search algorithm. a comparison to altimeter data combined with an independent estimate of the mean dynamic topography shows that the jets in the 2004-2006 period examined are persistent and stationary. the jets have a typical meridional width of 100 to 200 km and a median transport of 4 sverdrups. the jets tilt at approximately 6° from southwest to northeast in the horizontal plane, but show no significant tilt in the vertical plane. velocities and the cross-stream width are similar for the westward and eastward jets. 

the linear relation between the strength of the agulhas current at nominal latitude 34°s and the gradient in sea level height anomaly across the current is investigated in a 1/10° resolution regional numerical ocean model. our results show that the strength of the current can be estimated with reasonable accuracy using altimeter data, once it has been calibrated using in-situ transport measurements. three years of transport measurements provide a calibration with worst-case correlation r = 0.78. in that case the errors in proxy transport have a standard deviation of 9.8 sv, compared to a 20.2 sv standard deviation of the transport time series itself. from these results we conclude that the design of the agulhas current timeseries (act) experiment, a three-year deployment of moorings across the agulhas current and along a topex/jason altimeter ground track, will likely produce a good quality multi-decadal time series of agulhas current strength. 

estimating the magnitude of agulhas leakage, the volume flux of water from the indian to the atlantic ocean, is difficult because of the presence of other circulation systems in the agulhas region. indian ocean water in the atlantic ocean is vigorously mixed and diluted in the cape basin. eulerian integration methods, where the velocity field perpendicular to a section is integrated to yield a flux, have to be calibrated so that only the flux by agulhas leakage is sampled. two eulerian methods for estimating the magnitude of agulhas leakage are tested within a high-resolution two-way nested model with the goal to devise a mooring-based measurement strategy. at the goodhope line, a section halfway through the cape basin, the integrated velocity perpendicular to that line is compared to the magnitude of agulhas leakage as determined from the transport carried by numerical lagrangian floats. in the first method, integration is limited to the flux of water warmer and more saline than specific threshold values. these threshold values are determined by maximizing the correlation with the float-determined time series. by using the threshold values, approximately half of the leakage can directly be measured. the total amount of agulhas leakage can be estimated using a linear regression, within a 90% confidence band of 12 sv. in the second method, a subregion of the goodhope line is sought so that integration over that subregion yields an eulerian flux as close to the float-determined leakage as possible. it appears that when integration is limited within the model to the upper 300 m of the water column within 900 km of the african coast the time series have the smallest root-mean-square difference. this method yields a root-mean-square error of only 5.2 sv but the 90% confidence band of the estimate is 20 sv. it is concluded that the optimum thermohaline threshold method leads to more accurate estimates even though the directly measured transport is a factor of two lower than the actual magnitude of agulhas leakage in this model. 

the indian ocean water that ends up in the atlantic ocean detaches from the agulhas current retroflection predominantly in the form of agulhas rings and cyclones. using numerical lagrangian float trajectories in a high-resolution numerical ocean model, the fate of coherent structures near the agulhas current retroflection is investigated. it is shown that within the agulhas current, upstream of the retroflection, the spatial distributions of floats ending in the atlantic ocean and floats ending in the indian ocean are to a large extent similar. this indicates that agulhas leakage occurs mostly through the detachment of agulhas rings.
after the floats detach from the agulhas current, the ambient water quickly looses its relative vorticity. the agulhas rings thus seem to decay and loose much of their water in the cape basin. a cluster analysis reveals that most water in the agulhas current is within clusters of 180 km in diameter. halfway the cape basin there is an increase in the number of larger clusters with low relative vorticity, which carry the bulk of the agulhas leakage transport through the cape basin. this upward cascade with respect to the length scales of the leakage, in combination with a power-law decay of the magnitude of relative vorticity, might be an indication that the decay of agulhas rings is somewhat comparable to the decay of two-dimensional turbulence.

the relation between the agulhas current retroflection location and the magnitude of agulhas leakage, the transport of water from the indian to the atlantic ocean, is investigated in a high-resolution numerical ocean model. sudden eastward retreats of the agulhas current retroflection loop are linearly related to the shedding of agulhas rings, where larger retreats generate larger rings. using numerical lagrangian floats a 37 year time series of the magnitude of agulhas leakage in the model is constructed. the time series exhibits large amounts of variability, both on weekly and annual time scales. a linear relation is found between the magnitude of agulhas leakage and the location of the agulhas current retroflection, both binned to three month averages. in the relation, a more westward location of the agulhas current retroflection corresponds to an increased transport from the indian ocean to the atlantic ocean. when this relation is used in a linear regression and applied to almost 20 years of altimetry data, it yields a best estimate of the mean magnitude of agulhas leakage of 13.2 sv. the early retroflection of 2000, when agulhas leakage was probably halved, can be identified using the regression. 

the skill of numerical lagrangian drifter trajectories in three numerical models is assessed by comparing these numerically obtained paths to the trajectories of drifting buoys in the real ocean. the skill assessment is performed using the two-sample kolmogorov-smirnov statistical test. to demonstrate the assessment procedure, it is applied to three different models of the agulhas region. the test can either be performed using crossing positions of one-dimensional sections in order to test model performance in specific locations, or using the total two-dimensional data set of trajectories. the test yields four quantities: a binary decision of model skill, a confidence level which can be used as a measure of goodness-of-fit of the model, a test statistic which can be used to determine the sensitivity of the confidence level, and cumulative distribution functions that aid in the qualitative analysis. the ordering of models by their confidence levels is the same as the ordering based on the qualitative analysis, which suggests that the method is suited for model validation. only one of the three models, a 1/10 degree two-way nested regional ocean model, might have skill in the agulhas region. the other two models, a 1/2 degree global model and a 1/8 degree assimilative model, might have skill only on some sections in the region. 

time series of transports in the agulhas region have been constructed by simulating lagrangian drifter trajectories in a 1/10 degree two-way nested ocean model. using these 34 year long time series it is shown that smaller (larger) agulhas current transport leads to larger (smaller) indian-atlantic inter-ocean exchange. when transport is low, the agulhas current detaches farther downstream from the african continental slope. moreover, the lower inertia suppresses generation of anti-cyclonic vorticity. these two effects cause the agulhas retroflection to move westward and enhance agulhas leakage. in the model a 1 sv decrease in agulhas current transport at 32°s results in a 0.7±0.2sv increase in agulhas leakage. 

the adiabatic transit time of wave energy radiated by an agulhas ring released in the south atlantic ocean to the north atlantic ocean is investigated in a two-layer ocean model. of particular interest is the arrival time of baroclinic energy in the northern part of the atlantic, since this is related to variations in the meridional overturning circulation. the influence of the mid-atlantic ridge is also studied, since it allows for conversion from barotropic to baroclinic wave energy and the generation of topographic waves.
barotropic energy from the ring is present in the northern part of the model basin within 10 days. from that time, the barotropic energy keeps rising to attain a maximum 500 days after initiation. this is independent of the presence or absence of a ridge in the model basin. without a ridge in the model, the travel time of the baroclinic signal is 1300 days. this is similar to the transit time of the ring from the eastern to the western coast of the model basin. in the presence of the ridge, the baroclinic signal arrives in the northern part of the model basin after approximately 10 days, which is the same time scale as that of the barotropic signal. apparently, the ridge can facilitate the energy conversion from barotropic to baroclinic waves and the slow baroclinic adjustment can be bypassed.
the meridional overturning circulation, parameterized in two ways as either a purely barotropic or a purely baroclinic phenomenon, responds also after 1300 days. the ring temporarily increases the overturning strength. the presence of the ridge does not alter the time scales.